---
title: Centring curiosity
date: 2021-08-16
---

<p>There’s some sampling bias in how often biographies I read centre curiosity. But I wonder if it’s more my choice of reading material, than it is the kind of people who get biographies.</p><br><p>I started reading a <a href="https://www.worldcat.org/title/code-breaker-jennifer-doudna-gene-editing-and-the-future-of-the-human-race/oclc/1241436277">new biography</a> of Jennifer Doudna. She won a Nobel prize for her work on <a href="https://en.m.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRISPR">CRISPR</a>.</p><br><p>Almost immediately we run into her being an outsider as a child, her diverse interests. Her <strong>curiosity</strong>.</p><br><blockquote>“Her work also illustrates, as Leonardo da Vinci’s did, that the key to innovation is <strong>connecting a curiosity</strong> about basic science to the practical work of devising tools that can be applied to our lives - moving discoveries from lab bench to bedside.”</blockquote><p>CRISPR is something I know little about, bar a half remembered Radio Lab episode from a few years ago. So I’m really excited to read more, and whether this pays off.</p><br><p>But this does look promising:</p><br><blockquote>“Curiosity-driven research into the wonders of nature plants the seeds, sometimes in unpredictable ways, for later innovations. Research about surface-state physics eventually led to the transistor and microchip. Likewise, studies of an astonishing method that bacteria use to fight off viruses eventually led to a gene-editing tool and techniques that humans can use in their own struggle against viruses.”</blockquote>