---
title: There probably isn’t one reason
date: 2019-04-18
---

<!--kg-card-begin: html--><p>I <a href="https://joshnicholas.com/why-information-hygiene-matters/">finally</a> finished <a href="https://www.worldcat.org/title/hidden-half-how-the-world-conceals-its-secrets/oclc/1085142484&amp;referer=brief_results">The Hidden Half</a>. It&#8217;s one of the best books I&#8217;ve read in a while, and ties together <a href="https://joshnicholas.com/gender-inequality-and-linguistic-determinism/">much</a> of my <a href="https://joshnicholas.com/where-does-your-belief-come-from/">reading</a> and <a href="https://joshnicholas.com/a-plea-for-more-humility-about-what-we-know/">thinking</a> over the past <a href="https://joshnicholas.com/primed-for-determinism/">year or so</a>.</p><br>
<p>As a recovering determinist, I relish the celebration of uncertainty and the unknown. I&#8217;ve written quite a bit as I&#8217;ve read along. But here&#8217;s one more thought &#8211; the implications of uncertainty for silver bullets.</p><br>
<p>As much as we try to make the world bend to our will, there likely isn&#8217;t just one reason for anything. And so there probably isn&#8217;t one solution for it either.</p><br>
<blockquote><p>&#8230;The biggest things are unusual by definition. Unusual things often result from an <strong>alignment or interaction of many circumstances</strong> – that’s why they turn out big. <strong>By their nature, these will be harder to understand</strong>. However, this does not mean we have failed to research them as well as reasonably possible: in a world of enigmatic influences, research rigour does not equal nailing down. <strong>The best answer might be that there is no answer</strong>.</p><br></blockquote>
<p>The bigger the thing you&#8217;re trying to tackle or explain, the more influences it will likely have. Including ones you can&#8217;t see or measure. If you remove any of these jenga blocks, will your notion stand up?</p><br>
<p>This makes transplanting explanations or &#8220;solutions&#8221; from one context to another incredibly problematic. Your idea may have &#8220;fixed&#8221; the problem over there &#8211; and that&#8217;s a big if. But do you really know why? What about all the factors underlying that?</p><br>
<p>History is littered with simple solutions to complex problems and we&#8217;re all prone to creating panaceas. Modern democracies, especially, incentivise simple explanations rather than waiting, seeing and experimentation.</p><br>
<p>But the world defies being put in a box.</p><br>
<p>This is why public policies so often miss or fail entirely. Complex problems have complex causes and likely require nuanced and adaptable solutions. That it&#8217;s worked before or fits a particular world view isn&#8217;t enough.</p><br>
<blockquote><p>&#8230;A favourite big thing, a silver bullet, has so many advantages: it’s easier to sell, to describe, to understand, to put into practice. But whether the thing we pick would travel, on its own, to another context is another question. <strong>Silver bullets seldom work once, never mind twice</strong>.</p><br></blockquote>
<p>As I have written previously, what this requires is a <a href="https://joshnicholas.com/a-plea-for-more-humility-about-what-we-know/">little more humility</a>, as well as institutions and a culture that can accept uncertainty and not knowing. Working with best approximations and striving to improve them.</p><br>
<p><em>As always my emphasis</em>.</p><br>
<!--kg-card-end: html-->